# 3. Longest Substring Without Repeating Characters

- https://leetcode.com/problems/longest-substring-without-repeating-characters/

## Solution

We use the sliding window approach. We have 2 pointers `left` and `right` to keep track of the length of the longest substring without repeating characters.

1. We initialize `left = 0` to the start of the string. We initialize `result = 0` as the length of the longest substring without repeating characters we have seen. We initialize `seen = {}` as a dictionary of `{ [character]: index }` to keep track of the last index of every character we have seen.
2. We initialize a `right` pointer which starts from the start of the string, and iterates to the end of the string. For each character:
   1. We check if the current character (`s[right]`) has been seen. If the current character has not been seen, it means the current string `s[left:right+1]` is a string of non-repeating characters, with the length `right - left + 1`. We update result using `result = max(result, right - left + 1)`.
   2. If the current character has been seen:
      1. We check if the last index of the current character (`seen[s[right]]`) occurs before `left`. This means that the previous time we saw the current character (`s[right]`) occurs outside of the current window `s[left:right+1]`. In this case, we can continue updating our window normally (See above). 
      2. However, if `seen[s[right]] >= left`, this means that the current character is repeated within our current window `s[left:right + 1]`. We will then update `left` to be the character immediately after `seen[s[right]]`, to ensure that this character is not repeated within our window. Since this inevitably makes our window smaller, we do not need to update `result`.
   3. We then update our last seen characters (`seen[s[right]] = right`)
3. We finally return `result`.

```py
class Solution:
    def lengthOfLongestSubstring(self, s: str) -> int:
        result = 0
        left = 0
        seen = {}

        for right in range(len(s)):
            if s[right] not in seen: # we have not seen the current character, proceed as normal
                result = max(result, right - left + 1)
            else:
                if seen[s[right]] < left: # current character appears outside of current window, proceed as normal
                    result = max(result, right - left + 1)
                else: # current character appears inside of current window, update left pointer
                    left = seen[s[right]] + 1

            seen[s[right]] = right # update last seen index of current character

        return result
            
```

For a string of length $N$ and $M$ unique characters:
- Time complexity: $O(N)$. We iterate through `s` once per character. Adding/reading from the `seen` dictionary takes $O(1)$ time.
- Space complexity: $O(M)$. Each unique character in `s` is one key in `seen`. 